# Item 50: Embrace the Chaos

Almost all of the items in this section dealt with change; changing of people
working on the codebase, changing of the idea of the codebase itself, changes in
dependencies that the codebase relies on, changes in the world that affect how
the product is used. More specifically, though, it talks a lot about _dealing_
with change. "Handling" change. Until this point, we've looked at the concept of
"change", of "volatility", as a necessary _evil_, a bad thing that disrupts you
and forces you to put mechanisms in place to cope with it.

But there's another way to look at change: as a _good_ thing. Imagine that you
have a codebase for a product that's gotten _some_ traction, but not much. That
said, you've architected it to deal with constant change. You've written robust
E2E tests. You've abstracted away all of your dependencies. You've ensured that
the major ideas of the product shine through in the code. You've invested in
making sure your team has the knowledge and the empowerment to feel like the
idea representation in that codebase is theirs. Suddenly, the world shifts. The
company you work for is pivoting in a brand new direction and all of a sudden,
_your_ product is now at the forefront of next year's objectives. You have to
quickly scale to meet the demands of all of the new anticipated users. You have
to add a very complex set of powerful features for Fortune 500 customers. You
have to quickly hire and onboard 10 new engineers by end of Q1, almost 3x the
current size of your team. Look at what happens here. Because you have planned
for change, you have _anticipated_ it, _embraced_ it, you have fortified
yourself against many of the negative aspects of it. Because you have fortified
yourself against the negative aspects of it, something amazing happens: you are
able to accommodate it, and allow it to be used to your _advantage_. You quickly
onboard your new team (thank goodness for your excellent recruiting partners!),
they scale up quickly, and the codebase gets worked on without minimal friction,
far exceeding the expectations of your leadership chain. Tasks are delivered in
a reasonable time-frame. Pre-existing functionality is preserved for current key
customers, so retention remains strong. That one crazy algorithm a very
passionate dev on your team wrote that was only used in a few places now starts
to power critical components of your system. Congratulations: you have hacked
change.

**If you plan for change, and minimize harm when it occurs, then the only thing
that can happen is that you benefit from it.** _That_ is the beauty of embracing
change, and that is what effective communication can give you. The world is
constantly moving and shifting and sending you signals, things are constantly
smashing against one another causing chain reactions and paradigm shifts and
ecosystemic disruption, and it's all happening at a mile a minute. By sharpening
your communication skills, you will be able to quickly and accurately process
that information coming at you. You will then be able to adapt to that
information by using the techniques you've picked up in this book. But also, you
will be ready, when that fateful day comes, when you and your team are called
upon for that P0 mission fulfillment, for that all-or-nothing project, to
deliver. You embrace the chaos, and then let the chaos work _for_ you, not
against you.

I became a software engineer because I wanted to help people, plain and simple.
I hope that, if nothing else, this book has helped you to do just that.
